% Moving toward a sustainable ecological science: don't let data go to waste!
% Timothée Poisot, Ross Mounce, Dominique Gravel
% Nov. 2012

# Introduction

Claude Bernard [@Bernard1864] wrote that "art is *me*; science is *us*". This
sentence has two meaning. First, the altruism of scientists is worth more than
the self-indulgence of mid-nineteenth century Parisian art scene. Second, and
we will keep this one in mind, creativity and insights come from individuals,
but validation and rigor are reached through collective efforts, cross-
validation, and peerage. Given enough time, the conclusions reached and
validated by the efforts of many will take prominence over individualities,
and this (as far as Bernard is concerned), is what science is about. With the
technology available to a modern scientist, one should expect that the
dissolution of *me* would be accelerated, and that several scientists should
be able to cast a critical eye on data, and use this collective effort to draw
robust conclusions.

In molecular evolution, there exists a large number of databases (GenBank,
EMBL, SwissProt, and many more) in which information can be retrieved. This
values (and allows) a new type of scientific research: building over the raw
material of others, it is now possible to identify new phenomenon or evaluate
the generality of previously studied ones. The job of these scientists is not
to *make* data, neither to *stole* them, it's rather to gather them and, most
of all, look at them in a different way. This would not be possible, if not
for the existence of public, free, online repositories. It's impossible to be
as enthusiastic when looking at current practices in ecology. Apart from a
few, non-specific initiatives (*DataDryad*), or small-scale initiatives which
are not always properly maintained (*Interaction Web Networks Database*),
there is no data sharing culture among ecologists.

**TODO** [@Reichman2011] *DataONE* as a signal that some organizations are
ready to invest time and money

In this paper, using the example of ecological networks, we will argue that
improving our data sharing practices will improve both the science, and the
reputation of the scientists. We will illustrate how simple steps can be taken
to greatly improve the situation, and how we can encourage the practice of
data-sharing at different levels, and data citation
(http://datacite.org/whycitedata) to encourage and reward sharing.

<!-- Shall we have a table with good web examples of significant contributions to ecology that are impossible to achieve without data sharing? There are some questions that definitely need data sharing. -->
<!-- Another argument also would be that some data are so difficult to collect, it is so unproductive to leave them to some individuals. Think about the BCI data. It's such an impressive database, it stimulated a quantity of research that would not have been realistically accessible to a single team. -->
<!-- I maintain my suggestion, it would make the paper funny to read if we collect a couple of typical sentences (and perhaps provide response) we get when we ask for data-->

# Why we morally must

- Most data underlying published ecological research is generated by publicly- or charitably-funded researchers

**TODO** Find some examples of data sharing and availability policies from funding bodies

some UK-based funder policies:
- BBSRC (http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/organisation/policies/position/policy/data-sharing-policy.aspx)
cites OECD report principles that "Publicly-funded research data are a public good, produced in the public interest" and 
"Publicly-funded research data should be openly available to the maximum extent possible"
the policy itself: "The value of data often depends on timeliness" "it is expected that timely release would generally be no later than the release
through publication of the main findings"
applicants for BBSRC funding, as with NSF, NERC, and many other funders applicants *must* provide a "statement on data sharing" in grant proposals which will be assessed.

- NERC (http://www.nerc.ac.uk/research/sites/data/policy2011.asp)
"All the environmental data held by the NERC Environmental Data Centres will normally be made openly available to any person or any organisation who requests them."
"All those who use data provided by NERC are required to acknowledge the source of the data"
"All applications for NERC funding must include an outline Data Management Plan"
"The outline data management plan will be evaluated as part of the standard NERC grant assessment process. All successful applications will be required to produce 
a detailed data management plan in conjunction with the appropriate NERC data centre."
"...Those funded by NERC who do not meet these requirements risk having award payments withheld or becoming ineligible for future funding from NERC"


- It allows reproducibility of the science, which is supposed to be the rule

Using journals to publish scientific information should not only serve the
purpose of disseminating an interesting discussion of data: it should maximize
the ability of other researchers to replicate, and thus both validate and
expand, results. It's interesting to see that, while editors and referees
alike are very careful about the way the *Materials & Methods* parts of a
paper are worded, it's extremely rare to receive any comment about the data
availability. This can cause problems at all steps of the life of a paper. How
can a paper describing a new method be adequately reviewed if data are not
available? How can you be sure that you are correctly applying a method if you
can't reproduce the results? The movement of *reproducible research* advocates
that a paper can be self-contained, *i.e.* be not only the text, but also the
data, and the computer code to reproduce the figures. Even without going to
such lengths, releasing data and computer code alongside a paper should be
viewed as an ethical decision. Barnes [@Barnes2010] made the point that
computer code is good enough to be shared, even though researchers are not
professional programmers.

- It will fight bad authorship practices, people hitch-hicking on other people's work

Also, add a point about the quantification of authorship, some refs to cite here:
http://aidanmkeith.wordpress.com/2012/11/06/tiered-authorship-as-a-simple-quantifiable-and-greyscale-measure-of-contribution/

- Data are costly (time and money) to acquire, acquiring new instead of using old ones is wasteful

[@Heidorn2008] dark data, there is already enough material to answer some
pending questions 

[@Wicherts2006] surveyed the field of psychology, and showed that asking for
the raw data often doesn't result in a successful data sharing outcome, even
after 6 months of repeated inquiries. Authors can claim to have 'lost' the
data, can be extremely slow to reply, can ignore emails, the given contact
email address may be invalid and difficult to find the 'current' contact
address. Authors also die, and sadly this can result in the loss of valuable
scientific data unless it has been accessibly and discoverably archived
elsewhere. Ultimately, authors can also flat out refuse to give the data.

# Why is it beneficial for the one who collected data

- A proxy to your science: data are a mean for people to get familiar with what you do

[@Ince2012] improves reproducibility and adequate communication of your results

[@Vandewalle2012] showed that sharing computer code improved the scientific impact

[@Piwowar2007] Sharing detailed research data is associated with increased
citation rate for your papers

- It stimulates collaboration and creativity
- A measure of your productivity that is increasingly being appreciated and encouraged by research funder agencies, 
as an example: the NSF (US) Grant Proposal Guidelines for 2013 have renamed the 'Publications' section to 'Products' 
specifically to make it clear that they apppreciate research products that "include, but are not limited to, publications, 
data sets, software, patents, and copyrights" (http://nsf.gov/pubs/policydocs/pappguide/nsf13001/gpg_sigchanges.jsp).
Published datasets are now truly creditworthy, first class research objects (http://www.force11.org/white_paper) 
in the eyes of many funders.

# How we technically can

## Data representation

Except when they are deposited into large-scale databases, such as the ones we
previously mentioned, data usually live (in various states of dormancy) on the
hard drives of researchers. These data are usually formatted in the way where
they were used to produce the few figures used in the published account, which
is to say mostly as a spreadsheet, or a raw text file [@Akmon2011].
JSON / XML

## Data sharing
- Local databases but linked globally: APIs and programmatic access

An important obstacle is that maintaining a global database requires funding
on a scale which is orders of magnitude higher than what most grants will
cover. The other solution, building on an increased use of strict data
specification, is to link several local databases through APIs. A potential
research output for working groups should thus be to design a strong data
specification, and to publish it for other researchers to adopt. In the
ecological sciences, there are now publications outlets focused only on
methodological papers (*Methods in Ecology and Evolution*, and to some extent
*BMC Bioinformatics*), and several other journals have sections for
methodological papers. The conception of a data specification can thus be
valorised as a research output in the form of a publication, which is
accounted for by funding and tenure committees.

- FigShare and other projects: data can have a DOI and be cited/shared

## Data freedom!

- Apply appropriate Creative Commons licenses or waivers to digitally available 
research data to remove legal barriers to re-use and prevent legal ambiguity over 
what type of re-use is allowed by the authors. We echo [@Hrynaszkiewicz2012]
that the CCO waiver is best for factual non-copyrightable data (e.g. measurements) 
and that the Creative Commons Attribution license (CC BY) is best for copyrightable 
data such as photographs. Both these licenses are in accordance with the Panton
Principles (http://pantonprinciples.org/) for open data in science.
See [@Hagedorn2011] for further details, including an 
explanation of the pitfalls of more restrictive Creative Commons licenses.

# How it should be encouraged

## The role of journals

Journals are in the best position to make things move [@Vision2010], because a
scientist career depend on getting its papers accepted. Although when
possible, a bottom-up approach should always be preferred, editors have in their
hand a formidable lever to modify our collective behavior. Some journals are
now asking the authors to deposit their ecological data in a public repository
[@Fairbairn2011 ; @Whitlock2010]. This is mandatory for sequences in all
journals (*GenBank*), and archiving of all data in TreeBase, DataDryad, or
FigShare is becoming a common practice. The referees are, however, rarely
asked to evaluate if the adequate data are released (*e.g.* network metrics
and summary statistics instead of full networks), and even more rarely given
access to the data during the evaluation process. In practice, authors are
still free to release summary statistics instead of raw data, which allows to
reproduce the paper, but not to confirm the validity of the approach.

Journal-led mandates cannot be the only solution used. When compliance with
journal stipulations are retrospectively checked, even clinical trials data
compliance [@Prayle2012] and *GenBank* archiving of data are not
universally adhered to, even in the 'best' journals of highest reputation [@Noor2006].
Journals must take care that data archiving mandates are enforced and not just
'rhetoric', be it through increased editorial control, or by asking the
referees to evaluate the data sharing plans.

Ecological journals have policies in place

## The role of funding agencies

# Conclusion

In the last two years, there were an important number of media outbursts, and
public indignation, about the role of science and scientific conduct, which
may all have been avoided if the practice of putting data publicly online was
widespread. The so-called *climategate* [@Jasanoff2010] could have been
largely averted if all data were made public in the earlier days of the
affair, as it was later clearly demonstrated that the apparent lack of
transparency eroded public trust in scientists [@Leiserowitz2010 ;
@Ravetz2011]. Even more recently, the controversy over a study on the
carcinogenicity of GM maize [@Seralini2012] was thickened by the refusal of
both sides (Monsanto and the French research group) to release the full data,
in addition to many undisclosed conflicts of interests [@Meldolesi2012].

# List of possible boxes

- The story of the BCI data
- What we could tell about network biogeography with public data?